what is up guys karma medic here and
welcome back to another dose this video
is going to be part two of the ethical
dilemma series I'm doing for MMI we're
gonna be looking at the second half of
the kidney transplant ethical dilemma
that we looked at it in part one you
guys haven't seen that video already do
check on the card over here or find it
somewhere on my channel and watch that
video first all right without further
ado let's continue on to part two so
generally in the interview for ethical I
know my scenario questions you're going
to get the main question you're gonna
give your answer and then they'll ask
you follow-up questions to sort of see
how you would change your answer based
on new information something else that's
important to think about is the age of
the patient and a lot of the time in MMI
interview questions they will ask you
the scenario and then they'll say what
if the person was 39 instead of 29 or
what if the person was 29 instead of 39
and they will always try and catch you
out on this they always ask this age
angle and the answer to that question is
that age has absolutely no factor in
determining who should get these organs
remember that list I told you five
seconds ago age was not on it age gender
Beauty income religion all these factors
are not important when deciding who gets
a kidney everything is based on clinical
evaluation logical decision-making
rational decision-making for example if
you're deciding to give a kidney to a
fifteen year old or a seventy year old
it might be easy for you to say well
obviously give it to the fifteen year
old because they have their whole life
ahead of them
but the truth is you don't know any of
that the fifteen year old could overdose
from drugs at the age of twenty the 70
year old could go on to live until they
were a hundred so in that case if you
give the kidney to the child it would
only last it for five years whereas if
you gave it to the elderly person they
could have lost it for thirteen so you
never know an age just is not taken into
account in these decisions
like I said they often try and catch you
out with these questions and MMI so do
be careful another thing that they could
potentially act is would you feel
differently if the patient had a live
donor who is willing to donate a kidney
to them so this is a very good question
because it brings into light two of the
four medical ethics pillars autonomy and
non malevolence so autonomy is the idea
that each person is their own individual
and they should decide what they want to
do with their own body and non
malevolence is the idea of doing no harm
is our doctor should not inflict harm on
any of their patients so let's talk
about autonomy first if the person who
wants to do
the kidney is a fully autonomous person
not meaning that they have full
competency full mental stability and
they also have informed consent so they
know the situation they understand the
risks and they still want to donate the
kidney they are still fully autonomous
and that is within their right
even if doctors might not think it's in
their best interests however you need to
take into account the idea of non
malevolence so if doctors are going to
remove a kidney from this patient and
that patient is going to have one less
kidney and with that patient having one
less kidney their life is going to
change they're not going to be able to
do things the same way they used to be
and that also has inherent risks with
the procedure and following the surgery
so really this is a cost-benefit ratio
situation we have to weigh up all the
pros and cons of allowing this donor to
donate their kidney now regardless of
whether this person is able to do any
that kidney like we said before the
woman has a GFR of 28 and we would need
to wait until the patient gets down to a
GFR if less than 20 before we can put
them on the transplant list so we can
maximize the amount of lifespan that
they have after the procedure okay so
now in the case I'm gonna give you some
more information about this potential
donor and then we're gonna reassess if
we think this specific donor should be
able to donate their kidney so let me
give you guys a little bit more
information
she's a 65 year old woman and you take a
history which reveals she is a
hypertensive smoker on one medication
for successful blood pressure control so
successful meaning that her blood
pressure is below 140 over 80 she's a
family history of type 2 diabetes and
her daughter's cause of kidney failure
is Anka vasculitis there's no other
significant family history or kidney
problems or significant medical history
blood tests show no cause for concern
okay so do we think that this woman
should be allowed to donate a kidney and
if yes or no are some of the factors
that we would take into account when
making this decision so first things
first let's break down this woman's
history first of all she's a 65 year old
woman so as we've established one of the
things we take into account when
deciding whether someone should receive
a kidney is the age difference between
the donor and the recipient
and the reason for that is that you
don't want to give a 20 year old a 70
year olds kidney and that's because over
time of course the 7th kidney is going
to have the graded in function and if
they have other risk modifying factors
like smoking hypertension diabetes
that's also going to affect that
person's kidney function so she's a 65
year old woman
probably not the best to give a 30 year
old person that kidney because you want
the younger woman to live a full long
happy healthy life so you want to give
them the healthiest possible kidney that
you can second thing we know that she's
a smoker and smoking as I'm sure you
know has many harmful effects on the
body one of which is definitely to also
affect the kidneys smoking can restrict
blood flow to the kidneys it of course
can have many effects on the vasculature
of the body smoking can also affect the
blood pressure medication that she might
be taking to control her hypertension so
smoking overall is definitely bad and
it's probably having an effect on her
kidney function and in addition to that
we know that this person is already
hypertensive they already have high
blood pressure which as we've said
before is one of the biggest risk
factors for developing kidney disease
even though now it's controlled it could
have been really high in the past and it
will have probably done damage to this
woman's kidneys so these three points
definitely don't make this person an
ideal candidate for kidney donation
there's no point in donating this kidney
which is not at its optimal to somebody
who's thirty years old if five or ten
years down the line they're gonna
develop some major complications and
maybe need a new kidney now let's talk
about not doing harm or non malevolence
to the donor so if we're gonna remove
this kidney from the donor that donor is
going to have one less kidney for the
rest of their life and that's obviously
going to affect them in many ways if
they're already at risk for developing
any kind of kidney problems we don't
want to remove one of their kidneys
because then they're much more likely to
end up having kidney disease and kidney
problems in the future
however if this person is fully
autonomous has full mental capacity and
is mentally stable and is able to with
informed consent still know that they
want to go through this procedure then
they are an autonomous human and the
answer to this question of whether they
should or should not be able to donate
their kidney is really really tough and
I don't know basically you have to weigh
up all the pros and cons of the
conditions that we talked about that the
person has and their ability to want to
give up that kidney and this is
something for an ethics board to decide
but this is why we have an entire
Medical Ethics Board an entire team that
meets up to discuss a single patient all
the different factors that are relevant
to help them make that decision on
whether they should receive a kidney or
not and who they should receive that
kidney from and hopefully what you've
taken away from this is that even if you
don't have a concrete conclusion or
at the end of the video showing your
thought process your decision-making and
how you reached your conclusion or I
guess all the factors that you took into
account is what is really important
ethical decisions are rarely going to be
easy to make even though we have so many
guidelines to follow and so many people
to refer to and get expert opinions from
it's usually down to a case-by-case
basis and it can be very very difficult
and that's something that I think you
should definitely acknowledge in your
MMI interviews you know just
acknowledging that these are very very
difficult decisions and that it takes a
lot of people to be able to make them is
something that's important that you
should mention in interview so another
follow-up question that they might ask
you is that you tell all this
information to the potential donor who
we've said we don't think is a good
candidate to donate their kidney and
they come back to you and say you know
what I really want to donate this kidney
to my daughter I would do anything for
her I just want to improve her life I
want to save her I want to make her feel
better please please please let me
donate my kidney so how would that
affect your decision and obviously the
answer at the end of this is that it
would not affect your decision you've
made your original decision based on
clinical evaluation very rational
logical factors and you're not going to
change that decision based on an
emotional plea or a social desire but
what you definitely should mention and
talk about is that this is obviously
very difficult and you want to do what's
best for your patient and you can
definitely mention it interview how this
is a very difficult decision how you
want to do the best thing for both of
your patients you want to make the
mother happy because obviously this is
affecting her not being able to help her
daughter and you want to do the best
thing for the daughter by giving her the
best possible kidney that she can get
and one last follow-up question that
they might ask you is they might say
what if the donor had a gene that made
them a high risk for having hypertension
or high blood pressure and how would
that affect your decision so in this
case of course if the donor has a very
high risk of developing high blood
pressure later in their life we want to
make sure that they keep both of their
kidneys because if they were gonna
donate one of those kidneys to the
recipient and now only be left with one
kidney and they developed high blood
pressure and that was going to cause
them kidney damage that's obviously
going to lead to a lot of problems for
them in the future so if they did have
this gene that would increase their risk
of blood pressure in the future you
would want to make sure that they do not
donate as they
need both of their kidneys alright guys
and I think that's it for this video
this has been a really long case to
cover quite a big ethical dilemma I hope
you've enjoyed learning about the
different factors that we might consider
or take into account when looking at an
ethical dilemma like this organ
transplantation is something that does
often come up in MMI interviews so
something you probably want to prepare
for if you guys have any questions do
feel free to leave them in a comment
down below if you like this video if you
enjoyed it and do consider subscribing
to my channel if you want to see more
videos like this from me in the future
until next time I'll see you guys later
peace